---
title: The Death of the Subtle
description: How online spaces destroyed community and enable right-wing narratives
layout: page
---

> "When I give food to the poor, they call me a saint. When I ask why the poor have no food, they call me a communist."

> Dom Helder Camara (a Brazilian archbishop)

In the wake of Brexit, I've been going to a lot more political meetings and groups, and wondering, along with other people -- _what the hell happened_?

My (German) partner suggested a few weeks ago that the recent lurch to the right has been pretty quick, hasn't it? And the more I thought about this, the more I realise no, no it really hasn't. As long as I can remember growing up, The Sun and The Mail have been standard bearers for racism, xenophobia and bigotry. And yet, something about them seems so inevitable, practically part of our national makeup -- dare I say _tolerated_. We protest against the goverment (especialy the Tories), and know some degree about media ownership{% sidenote mail Although we know precious little about The Mail's owner [Vicount Rothermere](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jonathan_Harmsworth,_4th_Viscount_Rothermere), for example. %}, landed titles, the power that money buys: something about it feels as if it's always been there and is part of the fabric of the land, like trees or the wind. I mean you could get mad at those things if you wanted, but what's the point?

The last few years have seen these background forces gather pace. Maybe if you're black, working class, or one of the "bad migrants" (i.e., not from a rich country), the press's racism is much more tangible to you in a way I'll probably never understand as a white, middle-class person; I have previously been able to simply ignore it, for the most part. So perhaps it's just me, but I feel there's been an intangible line stepped over, and the right wing press is now _setting_ public policy rather than driving it. All pretense at caring about data and figures is out the window.

I went to a screening of a film about Mark Duggan's death last night{% sidenote harddstop [Amponsah (2015). _Hard Stop_.](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/george-amponsah-the-hard-stop-2011-riots-black-british-men) %}, about his friends and family and the police harrassment surrounding his life. And I couldn't help but see the connection between Michael Gove's comments that "Britain has had enough of experts", and the inquest into Duggan's death deciding that a white police officer can shoot an unarmed black man and see no repercussions. Could either of these statements exist without a press and politics that is seemingly explicitally trying to stir up hatred against poor and minority ethnic people? I doubt it.

By throwing away experts and rational decision making, those in power have the freedom to do basically what they want. In both cases, the "powers that be" flagrantly ignored data, public opinion, and community demands, in favour of simply deciding to _ignore it all_. It was pointed out in the Q&A that police have now been wearing body cameras for a long time, as a direct repercussion of police violence, and that is has had no effect on illegal stop and search as _nobody with power cares about the data_. Much as racism is meaningless without social power{% marginnote %}I use the definition that "[...] racism is _prejudice plus power_, and therefore people of colour cannot be racist against whites [...]. People of colour can be prejudiced against whites, but clearly do not as a group have the power to enfore that prejudice" [(Katz, 2003)](https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=yoFHSXoofoQC&lpg=PA43&pg=PA52&redir_esc=y&hl=en#v=onepage&q&f=false){% endmarginnote %}, so too is data it seems.

## The death of the subtle

I think there are two key trends driving these divisions.

The first is the way that social media is warping our social text. Social media makes it incredibly easy to have a voice as an individual, or broadcast an idea to the world. We have some in-between stages, such as posting things for friends only, or making groups. But these end up being effetively the same thing: what time in history have we broadcast our more "private" moments to several hundred people? Social media is designed and built by for-profit mega corporations to make people share insigificant thoughts as fast as possible{% marginnote %}I'll write an article another day on how and why they do this{% endmarginnote %}.

Social media does not allow us to broadcast things to people near us geographically, to merge similar groups together, to share our attendee lists with each other, and it hides or makes impossible more long-form posting. It doesn't allow us to create groups that our friends can opt in to - giving us crude, "all-or-nothing" options for reading other peoples' trains of thought. And perhaps most significantly, it encourages us simply to defriend or unfollow ideas we don't like. It gives us no tools for conflict resolution, resulting in the echo chambers so hotly discussed today. The entire structure is based on businesses and individuals and funded by the same billionaire plutocrats that also happen to own the press and the hedge funds: a kind of Ayn Rand-ian celebration of individual rights.

By design social media, and technology in general, has profoundly failed to promote community spirit. We are more divided than ever, and communities don't have basic organsing tools. We simply don't have high-quality community-owned events calendars, or business listings, or help and advice forums. We don't have ways to ask for or request help from people we don't know who live near us, or conflict resolution tools to put us in touch with people near us. These are hard things to make, and difficult ones, but I feel they _must_ exist to challenge the current status quo of the individual over all.

The second theme is the erasure of the subtle. Douglas Rushkoff idenfitied the concept of "narrative collapse" {% sidenote rushkoff [Check out this YouTube video of him describing the concept](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HhmkiiyfwoM) %}. In our sped up world, there is no future tense or past tense - there is simply _now_. Across all news media, due to the speed of information spreading, there is no longer the time to tell messages which require a backstory, or have a consequence. Instead, people want results immediately. And in this lies our problem. "Now" narratives are extremely easy to tell. "Asylum seekers are here to steal your money". "A black man was shot in London, he was probably in a gang". These stories require no before or after: simply a during. Therefore, as far as press is concerned, there is no need for data, no need for research, no need to link these stories to others like it and make a pattern. The stories simply _are_.

This clip from _The Wire_ I imagine being very close to the bone in many news offices on both sides of the aisle.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JGBn-alTPWA" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

> "I think you need a lot of context to seriously examine anything"

I can't echo these words enough{% marginnote %}OK, I'm a sociologist and bound to say that!{% endmarginnote %}. And I can also see, moral implications aside, the need to publish stories without doing hours and hours of prep. But I really think we need to start giving more airtime to the subtle, to the social context, to say that we don't know, we don't understand, we need more information, and to work with others who have pieces of the puzzle. We're currently in a techno-solutionist age that wants fast answers to simple problems. We are awash with data and data analysis that is being ignored en-masse. _This approach is not working_. Tin Geber asks people to _stop making apps to help refugees_{% sidenote geber [Geber (2016). _Hackathon and refugees: we can do better_](https://openmigration.org/en/op-ed/hackathon-and-refugees-we-can-do-better/) %}. The police bodycams show that all this data is meaningless without social power to back it up. But our neoliberal tech sector wants solutions as simple as the ones the press is peddling, without regard for if they work or not. Businesses (even Social Enterprises and charities) primarily measure success in money, not any other metric. And I see almost no coders or people in high level tech jobs at activist events or engaged in community groups that are to do with anything other than code.

This has to change. As technologists, innovators, and academics, we need to be drawn not to the extreme, exciting, new, or sexy: but to the needs of our community. We need to spend a lot more time listening and engaging and being part of solutions. We need to each each other, be compassionate, talk about lacks, and look to without not within to understand and help with problems. Borrowing Freire's critique of education, "good" in the sense of social good is not a bucket you fill, in order to deliver it to someone who needs it. Good is reaching out to other people on their terms and helping us solve our problems together. I feel there can be no real solutions that don't address both the stark contrast between online and physical communities, and the erosure of the subtle in favour of the instant headline.
